Testing, testing.
Testing, one, two, three, four.
Test, one, two, three, four.
This is February 6th, and we're at 309 Pershing, and I have the pleasure of chatting with Bill Kling.
Bill Kling, class of?
53.
Mr. Kling, to introduce yourself to anyone who might hear this tape or read the transcription,
Talk about your family and your days before World War II.
Where did you grow up, what did you do, and so forth?
I was born in Limestone County in 1919 on March the 8th in the town of Cossie.
I grew up there.
My grandparents were in the cotton gin business.
My father worked there.
In 1927 or 28, we moved out to the little community of Stranger, about seven miles west of Cossie, between Cossie and Marlin.
Stayed there till the people who hired him to run the Stranger Gin went broke.
The gin was financially
without money, so we moved into a, moved into what was in the teacherage there where the school teachers lived.
Stayed there for a year or less and then moved on a big farm up, a steel farm up north of Stranger and still about six or seven miles west of Cossie.
I grew up there, went into town, stayed with my grandmother, Stuart, and graduated from high school in 1936 from Cossie.
How big was your high school?
How many in the senior class?
Probably 15, maybe 20.
I played all of the sports, not too well,
the necessities, the scarcity of students there.
After I graduated in 1936, my dad and family moved up into the Panhandle to Borger.
My dad worked in the oil fields in the early days, mainly as a fireman.
rigs were all steam powered and having grown up in a steam powered cotton gin, he knew the workings of steam machinery and so he worked as a fireman in the oil field and worked around in the panhandle area up there.
And I guess we stayed up there less than a year, came back, moved out back into the same house we'd left from out west of town,
And in 1937, I guess, he moved down on the, down on the coast and went to work for J.S.
Abercrombie and the whole ocean oil field in Matagorda County, in Missouri County.
I went to Dallas and worked up there.
in 37, mainly doing odds and ends and working in a fast food place, what was then known as the pig stands, which would have burger forerunners of the barbecue places.
Where was the, because we used to stop at the pig stand out by White Rock Lake.
The one I worked at was on Forest Avenue,
about, I don't remember the cross streets, but it was about two or three miles from the fairground.
But the streetcar and the traffic all going to the fairground, and of course in 37 they was having the Pan American Exposition, which was the sort of the thing that followed the Texas Centennial celebration, which the big Texas
to do at that point in time was in Dallas.
And of course, Fort Worth didn't quite agree with that since they had Casa Manana and other things related to that.
But in 1937, I came home to Bay City for Christmas.
In between Christmas and New Year's, Christmas of 37, New Year's of 38,
My mother sent me over to the little corner grocery store to get a loaf of bread or something she needed for supper, and I got acquainted with the owner of the store.
And I asked him if there's a place I could go to work around that room, a job, you know, think about a job.
He said, well, his brother was a county surveyor and engineer that worked for Matagorda County,
And he was starting a project in January, and he thought he might need a hand or two.
So I went down and talked to John Rother, and he said yes.
He needed somebody to cut brush and work on a survey crew, starting right after the first of the year.
And if I'd bring my lunch and come down there, I'd go to work.
He probably had two or three
weeks of work.
Well that was in January of 1938 and I'm still on that project.
So that's the way I got introduced.
Not quite to the, to the survey and engineering profession which has been my career for all my life.
My first introduction to surveying was
I guess 1933 or 34, when the government began to subsidize farmers.
So they had a program that if you had over a certain amount of your acreage in cotton, if you would ply up cotton, the government would pay you for it.
At that point in time, cotton was in the neighborhood of a nickel a pound.
Really wasn't too
too profitable to raise cotton.
So they sent Mr. Honeycutt out to measure the cotton acreage, and I was assigned to help him.
Well, he had on high top boots and a very distinguished looking man, and I was impressed with him, and I thought, well,
Maybe someday I'll get to be doing something like that.
Well, I'm still working on that project, too.
All right, now you started that in the late 30s, and did you stay with that until the war started?
I did.
I started working on a survey crew, the lowest person on a survey crew.
In 1941, I was running in charge of a survey crew for John Rother.
And of course the World War II was going on in Europe and the draft was in effect here and my draft number came up and I was ordered to report to the draft board for induction and was told at that time due to my job with the county which was about a half of our work that I was entitled to
to a one-year deferment if I chose to take him.
I thought, well, I'll just go ahead and serve my year in the military and get out and go on about my business.
So I went into the military in October of 1941, and I got out in April or May, maybe it was June, 1946.
I went in, of course, as a private.
I later on went to officer's training school and was commissioned in the field artillery.
Due to my training prior to service, I was assigned in the field artillery to the survey end of,
of field artillery, which uses lots of surveyors, and was sent to Fort Sill to, for my training to what the military called an instrument and survey school up there, and I took basic training along with that, with that school, but when I finished that, finished that schooling, I was assigned to the Fort Fifth Division, which was Oklahoma National Guard,
and they had just been called into service.
And I was assigned to them, stayed at Fort Sill for a few weeks, maybe a few months, then went to Camp Barkley, out close to Abilene.
We moved into a cotton patch and set up tents with the cotton stalks still on the ground out there while they were building the barracks at Camp Barkley.
Where were you on December 7, 1941?
And how did you hear the news?
We had, I guess we had moved into barracks.
Yeah, we had moved into the barracks there.
Oh wait a minute, 1941 I was still at Fort Silt.
So, of course, this was on Sunday, and I was just around the barracks there on Sunday when somebody came out and said it's a Japanese bombardment harbor, and they'd heard it on the radio, so we all gathered around the radio and listened to that.
There was not too much commotion there except about 2 o'clock that night, Sunday night, the early morning of 8th of December,
They got us all up and made us turn in all of our gas masks.
We'd been issued gas masks, and these gas masks were shipped to the west coast in case of an attack by the Japanese there, something of that sort.
All right, then after serving here in Texas, then where?
Well, with the Oklahoma National Guard, we went to Barkley,
Then from Barkley we went to, I had to look at a map, but we went to one of the old forts in Massachusetts, one of the permanent forts up there.
But we didn't stay there very long.
We moved down to a little community, East Falmouth.
And there we were doing the training and set up the procedure that was later used throughout the Pacific and on D-Day for landing craft on the beaches.
So we'd go out and get on a mock-up ship out in the bay and then we'd load on to landing craft and they would, when we first started out,
I was carrying more stuff than you could get in the back of a big pickup.
Playing tables, aiming circles.
Must have been 150 pounds of gear.
When we got through, I was carrying a front and compass and a pair of field glasses and a map case.
So that was the...
Then later on, that fall when it got too cold and we'd already finished up that project, we moved up to Pine Camp, New York.
And this, we moved up there I guess in October.
One of the most beautiful drives I have ever seen was driving up the Hudson Valley in that
the Anirondack Mountains during the time of the year when the foliage was changing, and we moved up there into Pine Camp, New York, and of course then we were on maneuvers against the 2nd Army Division up there.
The coldest I've ever been was I guess on Lake Huron, with the snow about two feet deep and sleeping in pup tents out there.
and you could put on enough clothes to stay warm with that moist air blowing off the lake there.
And it was at that time that I took a test to see if I qualified to go to Officer's Training School.
And I left from there and went back to Fort Sill.
And I'd have to think about it, but I guess it was
About December of 42, I was commissioned second lieutenant in the field all the time.
Given the leave to come home for a couple of weeks, and I came home and visited my parents, and then I went back to Camp Maxie, which was up in northeast Texas, not far from Paris, Texas.
We were just forming the 102nd Division, just bringing the cadre in and the personnel in, and I was assigned to the 380th Field Artillery Battalion, whose commander was Colonel James Hannigan, who was later came here as David Menn under Earl Rudder.
What kind of a colonel was he?
He was a light colonel.
No, but I mean as a person.
Oh, he was a West Point graduate, of course, and a fine man.
I was in a battery A, one of the batteries, and as an officer I was a reconnaissance officer.
So the way I would know him and my dealings with him was
at staff meetings, things of that sort.
Later on, I was moved up to battalion headquarters and put in charge of the battalion survey group.
We went on maneuvers up there at Camp Maxey, and this was January of 43, as I recall.
Typical Texas weather, we left camp about, left our barracks about seven, eight o'clock, shirt sleeve weather, and by noontime it was snowing and cold.
Most of our people in the division had come out of the Chicago, New Jersey, Pittsburgh area.
none of them much had been off the sidewalks.
This was their first experience out in the field and they didn't have the foggiest idea of how to, how to manage out there.
Having grown up on the farm and whatnot, well I, we got some fires going and whatnot, and later on I found an old building out there and put some
tin or something up over the windows and blacked it out and used a Coleman lantern for light and we were doing survey computations on a survey problem out there.
When the inspectors, the officers that were grading, seeing how well we performed out in the field came around and I suppose as a result of
With that action, I was moved to Division Artillery Headquarters and put in charge of the division, the artillery surveyors there.
My first assignment up there was as an aide to General Busby, and then I was moved to the S2 section, the Intelligence section, as an assistant
intelligence officer who is the person that's in charge of surveying for the battalion, as well as intelligence.
And I was in that capacity until we went to Europe, landed in September in France, in Surberg, France.
September of 44?
44.
We were the first troops to come.
directly from the States to France without going through England.
So then you're part of the group going across northern France.
That's right.
And our unit was next to the British all the way.
We were the most northern American unit.
My first assignment
There, well, after I got off the boat, the first assignment was to clear a minefield.
When I told them that I was through, I cleared this path through the minefield, they said, well, you get in this tank and you ride with them if they drive through this.
I did, and we made it all right.
But it made you think, then, about how careful you'd be.
Now, were you all in, under Patton's command?
No.
No, I was under Keating.
General Keating was the division commander, and Hodges, I believe, because Hodges was the,
12th Army, I believe.
I think so.
That was next to the British.
Another one of my, of course, we, they, after that, the next assignment we had was to run what we called, what the military called the Red Ball Express.
The Red Ball Express was a convoy of trucks, and when I say convoy, there was about 500 in that
two and a half ton trucks and trailers.
They'd set up a road from the beaches one way to the front lines and another road system one way going back.
Had two camps.
The round trip was about 500 miles.
We had a camp at the halfway point on each side
A driver, an assistant driver, got in the truck and drove it until it quit running.
And we had, of course it stopped for fuel and that sort of thing, but it ran until it broke down and then we had wreckers and things that, if it couldn't get back to a shop to where it took it in, they passed it up and got it back to running and did the same thing over again.
But that was the way
The material was moved, everything from drinking water to ammunition and food and whatever was moved up to the front lines.
Were you all involved in the Battle of the Bulge area?
Well, after, after the, after we got through with the, or another unit came in and took over the operation of the Red Ball Express, we went into, into combat.
in Holland, and we are the first real tough fighting that we were involved with was going through the Siegfried Line, which was the boundary between Germany and Belgium and Holland.
We got through that and went up as far as the Ruhr River,
and they would not let us cross the Ruhr because there was some dams upstream from us that were still in German hands, and they were afraid if we crossed and put in temporary bridges and whatnot that the Germans would destroy these dams on these reservoirs up there and knock out the bridges and we'd be isolated over there.
So they waited till they...
until they took those.
Well, in that winter, of course, was when the Battle of the Bulls was.
The Battle of the Bulls was upstream from us or to our south.
They moved us out to where we had about 50 miles of front line between us and the Germans that we were responsible for.
In fact, the day that the Germans attacked, I had found out that my brother, who was in the second division, was in, just out of Luxembourg.
And I got permission to go down there and visit them.
And I was on my way down there, and I, and when I got into the town of Luxembourg, the MPs and everybody already had
had word out that everybody returned back to their units, and so I never did, I didn't get to see him.
My brother was in the second division, he was on the front lines when the Germans attacked, and he was cross-bitten, and evacuated to France, I mean to England,
feet were frozen.
He recovered from that and went back to duty in, I believe they were in Czechoslovakia in the second division when he went back into that.
But essentially the war was over at that time.
That is the fighting part of it, was over at that time.
We crossed the, after the Battle of the Boards was over, we crossed the Ruhr River
went into the town of Creightville, which is on the Rhine, and then we went around the industrial rural valley of Germany on the north and northeast side of it there.
The basic strategy there was not to
take the rural valley, but to surround it, cut it off, and isolate it, which they did.
And it wasn't long, of course, until they surrendered.
Where were you when the war was over?
I was on the Elb River.
up to the Elb.
In fact, we had crossed the Elb and gone another 10-15 miles with little or no resistance from the Germans.
Of course, the Elb was the line in which Stalin and Roosevelt and the British and Churchill
agreed as far east as the Allies or Germany, I mean the United States of Great Britain would go.
So we just, we sat there on the Elbe River.
The Elbe River was, at that point, the place was running nearly north and south, and of course we were on the, on the west bank of it,
and all of the valley is on the east side.
The lowland river plain is on the east side, so we were sitting up two, three hundred feet above this plain and watching the Germans and the Russians fight the war over there.
The Russians built the perimeter around the river, and they were bringing all their people in and crossing the
the Elb River on a destroyed railroad bridge and surrendered to the Americans rather than getting involved with the Russians, which they didn't.
Did you all have any contact at that time with the Russians?
I was one of the first ones to contact the Russians.
I went up and crossed
downstream from where the place I'm talking about on another bridge that had been destroyed that you could still walk across, get across the river on the debris of the remains of the bridge.
I had a sergeant that was Polish descent who could speak Polish.
So I got over there and contacted the Russians, and the Russians found a Russian that could speak Polish.
That's the way we, our conversation went through two interpreters.
One of the first questions that the Russians asked me was, why were the stars on our tanks painted white, where they had the same tank and with a red star on them?
They did not
understand that their equipment was all come lend and lease from the United States.
They thought we were using their equipment, but our star.
Were they pleasant?
Yes, yes, yes.
Of course, they had women in, not really in direct combat, but they were, they had them doing communications things, laying wire,
doing hard physical labor and of course we weren't used to seeing that at that point in time did you all have any kind of social you didn't have did you all have a party with them or a celebration when the war was over when the war was over for the first two weeks i guess
We would alternate nights, having parties.
Every night there was a big party.
One night it'd be on the American side and the United States side, and we hosted it, and the next night it'd be over on the other side.
Where did y'all get the refreshments?
I don't know.
Just from the countryside.
And the Russians were, too.
Of course, we had plenty of GI food, which the Russians lived entirely off the country, almost.
And now they had, of course, ammunition and gasoline was the thing that concerned the Russians.
They had all that.
As you saw their equipment,
and supplies, how did their equipment and supplies compare with ours?
Well, they used a lot of, of course, their trucks and armored equipment was nearly all ours.
Their things like field telephone.